Title: Best Affordable Hotels in Philadelphia
URL: https://medium.com/@paawann.mishra/best-affordable-hotels-in-philadelphia-1d9e4ad34a72
Tags: Hotels, Travel
----------------------------------------
Best Affordable Hotels in Philadelphia

Philadelphia is one of the best tourist destinations in the United States. It is the largest city in the state of Pennsylvania and often called just “Philly”. It is also a business hub, so popular among business travelers. The best season to visit Philadelphia is between March and May when the weather is pleasant. If you are planning a trip to Philadelphia for vacation or for a business trip then this article will help you in knowing about the best cheap hotels in Philadelphia.

Homewood Suites University City — Located on the Walnut Street, the Homewood Suites is a hotel range by Hilton. Just a 7-minute minute walk away from the 40th Street SEPTA light-rail station. The hotel features polished suites with excellent amenities like fully equipped kitchens, dining tables, free Wi-Fi, plus 2 flat-screen TVs and pull-out sofas. There are lots of restaurants well as grocery stores also located nearby.

Alexander Inn –At the Philadelphia Center City, the Alexander Inn is a hotel in a redbrick building dating to 1901. They claim to offer a free breakfast buffet and all-day snack bar. Other basic amenities include free Wi-Fi, en suite bathrooms and satellite TV. Corner rooms have minifridges.

Hampton — Hampton, in the past called Hampton Inn, is a moderately priced hotel chain by Hilton Worldwide. There is a free breakfast served daily along with free Wi-Fi and flat-screen TVs with HD channels. There is also a fitness centre and an indoor pool. If you are going for a business meeting then don’t worry they also have meeting space and a business centre.

Club Quarters — Club Quarters run and owned by Club Quarters Hotels and their hotels are specifically designed for business travellers. You’ll also enjoy if you are not on a business tour. The hotel is easily accessible from city’s major centres like City Hall subway station, restaurants, arts venues, and Independence Hall. Other facilities include Italian steakhouse, a fitness center (equipped with yoga kits) , and club living room with complimentary refreshments.

Sofitel — Sofitel is a located just 10-minute walk of 19th Street SEPTA Trolley Station. This 4-star hotel offers modern accommodation along with other services such as babysitting services, a currency exchange service, valet parking, an executive floor and a ballroom. The hotel is just walk away from Philadelphia’s attractions, like Philadelphia City Hall and The Residences at The Ritz-Carlton.

Loews Philadelphia Hotel — The hotel comes with 581 modern air conditioned rooms with free Wi-Fi, flat-screen TVs and even some rooms have minibars. Loews Philadelphia Hotel also features Bank & Bourbon restaurants that serves American dishes.

Now when you’ve come to know about the best hotels in Philadelphia, the next step is to find best hotel deals providers. There are many services like Expedia.com, Booking.com, Hotels.com Trivago.in, etc. There is a new player in this industry with the name “Cheap Booking Hotels.” They claim to offer up to 50% discount on luxury hotels around the globe, including Philadelphia. So what are you waiting for?Just go and get the best hotel deal.