Title: 3 Mood-Boosting Benefits of Being Sober and Social.
URL: https://medium.com/@drinksunchaser/3-mood-boosting-benefits-of-being-sober-and-social-c0e3fe42412b
Tags: Sober, Life Hacking, Drinking, Party, Health
----------------------------------------
Pictured: Raymond Porter with a can of Sun Chaser

Who’s ready for #3?

When you think of socializing, you might think of cocktail parties or bar gatherings. In the midst of this global pandemic, many of us have been forced to evaluate the role that alcohol plays in our lives, and what socializing will look like going into the new year. This pause on our usual methods of socializing has given us the opportunity to see the true value of human connection, and how we feel as a result!

You likely never saw yourself attending a “party” in your pajamas from your living room! Zoom parties just prove that what we really crave is the connection and not the alcoholic beverages that are often associated with socializing.

So, moving forward, what if we took the alcohol out of the equation? Or at least, brought in more non-alcoholic options. Would that force us to be more thoughtful about why we are socializing and who we’re doing it with? The answer is yes.

COVID-19 has no doubt been very difficult on all of us. It’s been a draining experience that each of us have shared, and dealt with at the same time. However, with every challenge we face there is a lesson weaved in for those who are willing to look closely.

We’ve got 3 mood-boosting benefits of sober socializing to assist you in making your transition to a healthier and more enjoyable year ahead.

Better relationships. You’ll remember what people say, and better understand those around you.

Do you ever wake up with a fuzzy memory of seeing someone you know, or bits of a conversation floating through your mind? The whole point of being social is to gain meaningful experiences with those around us. When your conscious mind is blurred by booze, there’s a lot less of that meaningful connection going on.

We say things with the intention of being heard. Going out sober, or taking a night off the booze, allows you to not only listen better, but to understand. In a time where many of us feel divided, misunderstood, or under represented, it’s so important to listen. Socializing sober allows us to absorb the most from the connections we’re making!

2. New career advances. Bigger and better networking opportunities.

Yep, like it or not, boozey socializing is a big part of networking! Whether we’re attending a Zoom work party from home, or gearing up in 2021 for our first office get together, let’s make the most of these events!

Many of us end up blowing a possible networking connection because we’re too intoxicated to represent ourselves in the best way possible. It’s easy to lose sight of what’s important when you’ve got an open bar staring you down. The next day, you’ll need to remember the connections you made in order to act on them. A thoughtful follow up will be much more useful than a hangover!

When you head to a work or social event, you’re going because you hope to get something out of it. Make the most of your time by socializing sober! Having a non-alcoholic beverage on hand like Sun Chaser will help you keep your head in the game! With refreshing notes of tart cherry, apple, and a pop of mint, Sun Chaser can compete in the flavor department of high end cocktails.

3. No next-day regrets, only next day fun!

Nothing will boost your mood like waking up after an event with zero looming guilt or shame! By socializing sober, you remain clear-headed during and after your event. No apologetic messages about your behavior, if you’re sipping on Sun Chaser you’re only left with the fun memories of an evening with others.

Perhaps most importantly, you’ll also be ready to tackle whatever you have planned for the next day! Alcohol-free beverages not only assist your mental-health goals, but also your wellness goals. You can feel confident that you’ll wake up feeling refreshed for that morning yoga, hiking session, or walk through the neighborhood.

Cheers to that!