Title: What are the ways of gardening for beginners?
URL: https://medium.com/@munibajamil321/what-are-the-ways-of-gardening-for-beginners-f658aa8761f6
Tags: Basic Steps Of Gardening, Ways Of Gardening, Strategies Of Gardeners, Gardening, Beginners Gardening Tips
----------------------------------------
Gardening is one of the best hobbies that people adopt in their spare time to keep them busy. It keeps a man healthy. It is a rewarding hobby. Gardening is necessary for all the being on Earth. We know that the atmosphere of

Earth is ruining day by day. So the genius people do the gardening to save them and their environment. So gardening is suggested to everyone who wants to improve his health. But there are some problems to start gardening for beginners so they should learn some methods or techniques to start gardening. Home gardening is also very famous these days because it provides fresh fruits and vegetables to one.

Techniques for gardening

Most common gardening techniques are

Organic gardening

Organic gardening is a type of gardening in which we don’t use fertilizers and pesticides. That is the most environment-friendly technique.

Conventional gardening

Unlike organic gardening, conventional gardening is a type of gardening in which we use chemical herbicides and pesticides in different amounts. The number of chemicals depends upon the types of plants.

Companion gardening

Companion gardening is a type of gardening in which we grow plants in relation to others so that we assure insects to keep away from our plants.

Biodynamic gardening

Biodynamic gardening is the same as organic gardening as we don’t use chemicals to grow crops faster. In this type of gardening, we use ancient techniques of a different culture.

What are the steps to grow a plant?

1 Firstly we should decide on an area of our house for planting

2 you should choose quality soil

3 Buy seeds from a nursery

4 Sow seeds in the soil

5 Water them timely

6 If needed, fertilize the soil

7 Make sure seed can get enough sunlight

8 Now wait for seedling

How to protect your plants from insects and pests?

No matter where you purchased your seedling or plant, pests are always there to ruin your plant. You are thinking that you are purchasing a plant from the greenhouse and there would be no pests then its wrong. There are insects or pests in every plant.

So to avoid insects there are many sprays available for protecting plants. Some of these sprays are

1 Herbal water spray

2 Neem water spray

3 Spray made of dishwashers

4 Black pepper spray

5 Alcohol water spray

6 Soap water spray

7 Chilly water spray

8 Diatomaceous spray

9 Tomato leafs

10 Oil-water spray

You should know what to grow

An individual must know what he should grow in soil. Because the quality of a plant depends upon the matching of soil with the seeds. If you plant a seed in soil that doesn’t have maximum nutrition for this type of seed, your seed cannot grow properly. For this reason, you should know the quality of your soil and you should select the seeds according to your soil. For example, if you have a sunny place then you should plant vegetables because vegetables grow best in a sunny environment. For example, you should plant vegetables so you can get neat and clean food from your home garden. Moreover, you should also plant fruits so you can get organic and chemical free fruits.

Frequently do a soil test

It is necessary to set your soil frequently. For this purpose, you should have a soil testing kit that can be bought from any nursery and from online. The soil test tells you about the pH level, phosphorous, and nitrogen level of your soil.

Soil test indicates that what you need to add to your soil such as fertilizers to improve growth. Seed starter is also a good option for better growth because they are not as heavy as fertilizers.

Label every plant

It is a good tip for gardening that even if you grow only four to five plants in your garden you have to label them properly. So you can give them nutrition as they required.

Fertilizers usage

The use of fertilizer is also a very important factor for the better growth of plants. Some types of soil don’t have enough nutrients to nurture the plant due to frequent crops so we have to provide extra nutrients by fertilizers. A gardener should know about good and accurate fertilizers.

conclusion

Plants are important for us because they are the source of oxygen and without oxygen, we shall die in mints. If we want to live a healthy life that we must grow plants for ourselves. It is not compulsory to be a farmer to grow plants instead a common man can get the principles of planting and can plant trees, flowers, herbs, and shrubs.