Title: Use Dj’s Aviation exclusive NordVPN deal and increase your security online!
URL: https://medium.com/@frankpontony/use-djs-aviation-exclusive-nordvpn-deal-d74a67e37175
Tags: VPN, Offers, Discount, Coupon
----------------------------------------
Dj’s Aviation is a popular YouTube channel that has more than 280k subscribers. Dan is the sole member of the Dj’s Aviation, whose passion for Aviation started over 14 years ago when he was only 19 years old. When he was younger he would have regular trips to the airports and this was what hooked him. Since he had such a huge passion for such a quite rare topic, he decided to create a YouTube channel and share it with others and fuel their passion for Aviation too. In his videos, Dan talks about various aviation news, analysis, shares his opinion, etc. Although Dan doesn’t have to do anything with cybersecurity, he still takes care of the viewers and shares how important it is to consider such factors. For that reason, Dj’s Aviation YouTube channel recommends using NordVPN and starting surfing online securely.

The best possible deal is waiting for you!

Take Dj’s Aviation recommendation and take care of your security online. Use the exclusive deal and get NordVPN with a 70% discount, secure yourself online for only $3.49/month with a 3-year plan.

Follow this link to apply the discount code automatically

If you want to secure all your devices, you can click here and download the software for iOS, or if you want to download it from Google store, you can do it by clicking here.

Why should you get NordVPN?

This premium quality VPN is the right choice when you’re looking for increasing your online security and other perks. First let’s talk about VPN’s primary purpose — security. NordVPN is based in Panama, meaning it doesn’t have to stick to mandatory data retention laws; therefore, it offers strict no-logs policy and stores neither usage nor connection logs. Regarding other benefits, it has features like P2P servers and a kill-switch that will allow you to torrent securely. Also, it’s capable of overcoming Netflix proxy blocks and works with other popular streaming service providers like Hulu, BBC, Amazon Prime, and many others. Moreover, it has over 5k servers in more than 60 countries and offers 6 simultaneous connections.

What is a Virtual Private Network?

VPN is a well-known online security tool that helps users to protect their internet traffic by encrypting it. That way, users can not only surf online securely but anonymously too. The virtual private network can be compared to a secret (or to be more specific — encrypted) tunnel that protects users’ info, which comes from the device to the internet. It also helps to avoid such intruders as hackers, the internet service provider, and even the government. Moreover, VPN is used for cases like gaming, torrenting, streaming, and securely using a wireless network in public places.