Title: How To Speed Up Metabolism Fast — A Daily Checklist
URL: https://medium.com/@elevateme-ai/how-to-speed-up-metabolism-fast-a-daily-checklist-elevateme-b8c3fce3be8c
Tags: Metabolism Diet, Metabolism, Metabolism Booster, Improvement, Energy Healing
----------------------------------------
Lifestyle changes to increase your metabolism

Photo by Zohre Nemati on Unsplash

1. Try getting a good night’s sleep

Sleep is fundamental to an optimised life.

Lack of sleep is linked to a significant rise in the risk of obesity¹. This may be partly due to the negative effects of sleep deprivation on metabolism². Lack of sleep can:

lower your calorie burn³

change the way you process sugar³

disrupt your appetite-regulating hormones³.

Aim to get 7–8 hours of sleep a night if you are looking to provide a boost to your metabolism.

2. Drink more water

People who drink water instead of sugary drinks have a better chance of losing and keeping weight off⁴.

Moreover, it doesn’t get any easier than this when it comes to losing weight.

Simply drinking more water increases the rate at which you burn calories and is a healthy metabolism booster. In fact, drinking two glasses (around half a litre) of water can speed up metabolism by 10–30% for an hour⁵.

Water can help you lose weight and maintain it. It is a perfect example of a healthy metabolism booster.

3. Try out High-Intensity Workouts

High-Intensity Interval Training (HIIT) is one of the best types of exercise for the body. It’s basically short bursts of intense activity. In other words, HIIT involves stringing exercises together and maintaining active rest to keep your heart and breathing rates up. Thus with HIIT you also get the benefits of aerobic exercise. Even after your workout, it can help you burn extra fat by raising your metabolic rate⁶.

Try HIIT workouts for just 10–15 minutes daily. The high-intensity workouts will help you burn fat and boost your metabolism.

Here’s a great 5-minute HIIT session for you to watch or bookmark for later!