Title: Things Nobody Tells You About Having A Cat
URL: https://medium.com/@jessicagregory962/we-all-know-that-cats-are-extremely-popular-3af67f439121
Tags: Cats, Pets, Cats N Things, Life, Funny Cats
----------------------------------------
We all know that cats are extremely popular. We also know that even in ancient Egypt, they were regarded as sacred creatures. But those who have cats, or have owned one in the past, can tell you first hand that it ain’t no picnic, and it’s really not for the weak.

Of course, I am an animal lover. I love and care about all types of animals, including any and all breeds of cats. I have a cat myself, named Artemis, so i can personally attest to pretty much everything on this list.

Note: This article is not intended to discourage anyone from adopting or rescuing a cat. By all means, if you are able to adopt a pet, and give it the nurturing and care that it needs, please do so. Sadly, many pets do not get the opportunity to be welcomed into a loving home.

With that being said, I felt that it was important to point out some of the...erm...darker sides of our furry feline friends.

Get a cat, they said. It will be fun, they said....While cats are fun and very lovable, there are some things i wish i knew beforehand, such as:

1. Sometimes having a cat is more like having a kid.

Aside from the obvious feeding and care, I find that my cat (Artemis) could very well be compared to my two children. For example, she steals my spot in bed, tries to eat my food, and plays with my kids' toys probably more than they do.

Long story short, cats are basically just toddlers with fur.

2. Say goodbye to your household items.

Let's be real, here. If given the opportunity, a cat will tear up anything from toilet paper to a loaf of bread. Nothing is safe. Just recently, my new, five-month-old shower curtain was victimized. The Clawed Criminal strikes again...

3. You are not allowed to have dangling earrings, long hair, a Christmas tree, or anything else for that matter.

I've found that it's probably easier to just not have feet, either. Cats love anything that they can slap. I've given up crocheting for this exact reason.

4. If you have a garbage can anywhere, be sure it has a lid.

I know what you're thinking...but seriously. When I first moved into my house, the lid to my kitchen garbage was broken. Needless to say, I didn't think there was anything wrong with using it without a lid until I could get another one. Well, then the cat came along....Be warned.

5. Don't let the litter box fool you.

It doesn't matter if you buy the most expensive, gold-plated, diamond studded litter box that you can find, until they get used to it, or reach a certain level of maturity, they will crap wherever they please, and they will give absolutely zero f**ks about it.

6. Cardboard boxes are the adventure of a lifetime.

You can buy them literally any toy, and cats would rather have the box it came in. This isn't necessarily a bad thing. It's just adorable, and funny to watch.

7. Hair. Everywhere.

Don't get me wrong, this one isn't ridiculously annoying, until the hair starts getting in your mouth. I don't think i need to explain this one. Especially to fur parents with extra furry fur babies, fur kids, or whatever else the kids are calling it these days. My advice is: the cheap, sticky lint rollers can be your best friend. If you don't have one, clear packing tape can also be your friend. Not your BEST friend, but close enough.

8.Hairballs.

This one really should have been in the hair category, but I think we can all agree that the coughing, hacking, and spitting are on a different level of annoying. This needs no explanation. Remember when you were little and your mom told you not to lick the lollipop with the hair on it after you dropped it on the floor? This is why.

9. They actually are really great pets.

I realize that we've spent this entire article pointing out some not-so-fun things about cats, but they really do make hilariously fun pets and personally, i wouldn't trade mine for anything.

They are lazy, selfish, playful, sweet (when they want to be), spoiled little creatures and i encourage anyone that loves animals, or simply just needs a buddy to adopt or rescue one. They’ll thank you, and you’ll have a lifelong love/hate relationship. Mostly love.