Title: Looking Back & Looking Forward
URL: https://medium.com/the-outlier/willem-jan-van-den-heuvel-91af6c86dcda
Tags: Data Science, Academia
----------------------------------------
Excellent Data Scientists

Willem-Jan has been closely involved in the development of the Data Science & Entrepreneurship curriculum which builds upon 4 pillars: Data Engineering, Math & Statistics, Business Analytics and the Socio-legal-economic Context.

JADS’ vision on Data Science — the science that develops methods and techniques to turn data into value.

Due to the popularity of data science and abundance of external libraries and packages, the use of advanced techniques has become accessible to a wide range of audience. You may ask yourself: to what extent is it really necessary to have a solid foundation in for example math and statistics? Willem-Jan explains: “You must be able to drive a car, but as a data scientist you should also know what goes on under the hood. This helps you understand how new technologies work in the future: is it the right approach, is it reliable and in which situation can I apply a specific algorithm? We hope to deliver students who are scientifically critical the moment they graduate but also maintain this attitude in the future.” To illustrate this he refers to a course on Hadoop he currently teaches: “In the end it’s nice if students know the trick (it has a fair market value), but I think it’s more important that they understand how it works methodologically and conceptually. That’s what they bring along and which they can benefit from in the long run.”

“You must be able to drive a car, but as a data scientist you should also know what goes on under the hood.”

In summary, at JADS academics primarily focus on solving practical problems, still a theoretical understanding remains essential. On top of this, I asked him what he thinks makes an excellent data scientist. Basically, he mentions 3 criteria:

Analytical skills — mastering the exact sciences (statistical and mathematical models).

Engineering skills— someone who is not only capable of analyzing (big) data but who can also turn data into a product or service.

Domain knowledge — connecting your product or service with market demand.

The latter is the big secret according to him: “It’s relatively easy to come up with a new algorithm. A PhD researcher should be able to publish an article about an incremental improvement of an existing algorithm without too much effort. Building a product or service that is adopted by the European community and delivers social and economical value requires certain skills which not everybody possesses. Then you are excellent in my eyes.”