Title: Why have an online store
URL: https://medium.com/kduka/why-have-an-online-store-bd18d671768f
Tags: Kduka, Online Shopping, Ecommerce, Online Marketing
----------------------------------------
With online shopping catching on, it’s become crucial to have an online store in order to capture that market and retain some of the current customers too. There’s a whole lot of people who would want to shop/research online rather than walk into a “bricks-and-mortar" setting.

In addition, the same benefits befall the people who want to start their business online from the word go. This seeks to encourage both parties to have their business out there.

On the other hand, it’s much cheaper to setup an online store than a retail business. With kduka, you can do this in a matter of minutes.

Not convinced yet? Here are more reasons why you should have an online store:

Availability: With an online store, you’re available 24/7. A customer can visit the store anytime from anywhere provided they have an internet connection. This gives you and your store more exposure and a chance to make more. Work from anywhere: It’s much easier to work from anyway with an online store compared to a physical store. For a physical store, it’s dire to be there during the working hours, whereas with an online one, you just need open channels of communication and you are all set. Reduced Costs: With Kduka especially, we reduce the initial cost of hiring developers to create a store for you. You can create your own store in minutes and customize it as you like. Compared to a physical one/hiring web developers, which would mean spending more on initial setup and operations. Global Market Exposure: With an online store, anyone from anyway can see it and buy the products. With shipping and transportation made easier by the logistics companies, it’s much easier to deliver products globally. Better customer service and support: It’s much easier to help your customers in realtime as they can reach out when they are in need. They ask questions regarding the products before purchase. They can also inform you on problems they are having with purchases or comparisons with other products. Customers want it: Slowly, customers prefer to shop online or window shop before doing a purchase. Having an online shop ensures you don’t this segment of customers. This is reason enough to create an online store and be engaged with your customers. Flexibility: You can change your online store anytime you want to without much of a hassle or incurring expenses. You can experiment with different themes and designs till you find one that works for your customers.

Evidently, an online business gives you freedom and flexibility in terms of time, finances and location. To get started, visit Kduka today and setup your own store.