Title: Maximizing Your Impact: Providing Support and Increasing Sustainability for Local Nonprofit Organizations Across the Globe
URL: https://medium.com/an-idea/maximizing-your-impact-providing-support-and-increasing-sustainability-for-local-nonprofit-49bc4af6c9a3
Tags: Leadership, Nonprofit, Social Impact, Philanthropy, Social Impact Investing
----------------------------------------
Year’s end is a time for reflection. Reflecting on all that has happened not only in this year but in recent years as well — a worldwide pandemic, social injustices, food insecurity, natural disasters — there is no questioning the value and importance of nonprofit and philanthropic organizations. Globally, nonprofits, with their expertise and passion, are needed now more than ever. As a North American donor supporting nonprofits abroad, you can amplify not only your impact but the ‘organization’s impact by serving in multiple capacities, in addition to monetary giving.

As the Chronicle of Philanthropy explains, “philanthropists don’t always understand what charities need the most, and nonprofit executives may not feel comfortable asking for the kinds of help they need.” The article goes on to state, “Just as nonprofits strive to understand the experiences and the needs of the communities they serve; donors must also understand the needs of those communities and the nonprofit organization’s unique needs. A cornerstone of any effective nonprofit is collaboration. While your monetary donations go a long way, international organizations want you as a partner in their work. Think of your collaborative efforts as donations in and of themselves. Here are four ways that you can add value to your nonprofit support in addition to unrestricted funding:

Time is money

The adage “time is money” has persisted because it resonates as truth. Money is not the only thing that keeps nonprofits running. Giving your time is just as important and valuable as monetary donations. Did you know that a volunteer’s time is valued at $27.20 per hour? By volunteering only two hours a week for one year, you contribute $2,829 worth of expertise! Visit the organization of your choosing to witness their work in person, speak with their staff, and form connections with their clients. This firsthand knowledge and understanding of a nonprofit create the foundation for a healthy, long-term partnership. As an individual, you may also inquire with the nonprofit(s) that you support about serving in other capacities, such as an advisor or mentor.

2. Make it social

“Done well, social media messages can help you engage supporters [… and] increase awareness of your organization or brand, which may support fundraising efforts,” MissionBox, an online nonprofit publication, argues. As a donor, you can amplify your impact by leveraging your brand and social media platforms to help increase the visibility of the nonprofits you support and highlight the impact they have on their communities.

Photo by Adam Jang on Unsplash

2020 has provided a unique opportunity to reach more people than ever before. With wide swaths of the population mostly confined to their homes and increasingly spending time online, social media can be an incredibly effective way to spread awareness of a nonprofit’s mission. For example, introducing an organization to family, friends, and others in your social circles may provide some hope and semblance of normalcy. Seeing that a specific nonprofit group and its mission are important to you, they may be inclined to share posts with their friends further and perhaps even contribute financially. Global business leaders and philanthropists MacKenzie Scott, Ratan Tata, and Richard Branson all provide outstanding examples of this action.

3. Use your talents

People give to people, so put a face to the nonprofit you love. As an executive coach for nonprofits, I passionately believe that outside experts can drive sustainable results and lasting change by providing the support an organization needs to thrive. You have skills in strategic planning, communications, fundraising, board leadership, program development, human resources, technology, or any other number of complementary fields. You can advance organizational growth and sustainability by providing coaching services to a nonprofit leader. My own experience working with local civil society groups in over 30 countries has taught me that the nonprofit sector’s needs vary significantly, especially across different regions. An executive coach inspires and helps nonprofit executives and emerging leaders find the best in themselves, and it may just be the best thing you can do to help the nonprofit your support.

4. Think long-term

If there is an overarching theme to this article, it is this — financial donations are essential for nonprofits to function, but they are not everything. Money alone can be a barrier between the donor and the organization, often coming with strings and creating a strained power dynamic. Donations can be distancing without a face to go along with the contribution. Amplify the impact of your unrestricted grant with time, support, expertise, and relationship building. Your understanding of what an organization needs to reach its highest potential can help your community create the greatest good.

Edmund Settle is an Executive Coach and can be reached at edmundsettle.com. Leveraging over 20 years of international human rights and development experience, he works with nonprofit and community leaders to maximize their organizations’ impact.