Title: How to take advantage of global digitalization and use it to motivate and initiate change in our societies.
URL: https://medium.com/@tooodooo/how-to-take-advantage-of-global-digitalization-and-use-it-to-motivate-and-initiate-change-in-our-9d5de2d8b401
Tags: Behavior Change, Company, Incentives, Digitalization
----------------------------------------
How to take advantage of global digitalization and use it to motivate and initiate change in our societies. tooodooo Aug 10, 2020·4 min read

The year 2020 has been a historic year for society and the global economy. The health crisis continues, and will continue to do so for some years to come, disrupting the daily lives of businesses and individuals. Sometimes imperceptibly, other times much more brutally. Operating methods and consumption patterns are changing profoundly throughout the world. This societal change sees a preponderance of ecology, the responsibility of individuals through their behavior and an increasingly important place for digital. E-learning, E-education, E-medicine, Telework… Our societies are entering a new era in which companies and individuals have no choice but to jump on the bandwagon and risk being overwhelmed by these changes.

With this in mind, the important thing is not whether or not to adopt this paradigm shift with the ongoing digitalization of society. Rather, what is important here is how to take advantage of this global digitalization and use it to motivate and initiate change within our societies.

Continued global digitisation

“Nothing is lost, nothing is gained, everything is transformed”

This sentence pronounced in 1789 by Antoine Lavoisier, a French chemist and economist, demonstrates the essence of change. Without losing or gaining anything, the essence of change lies more in the will to accompany it than to impose it.

Over time change has occurred continuously, first individually and then politically. Then finally in an entrepreneurial way. Our recent history has generally seen these changes imposed on us. By obligation rather than by choice.

The stock market crash of 1929, the first major economic crisis of the 20th century, which put Western banks and companies out of business, has, despite itself, forced a change in the modern vision of the world’s financial markets and stock exchanges. This change was an opportunity to see the emergence of regulatory bodies that restored people’s confidence in the markets and thus a new step in the economic evolution of society.

Similarly, the oil shocks of 1973 and 1979 brought economic crises that initiated the policy change ending the Bretton Woods agreements and the convertibility of the dollar against gold. Another paradigm shift!

Each of these crises has had a profound impact on societies to initiate change in them. The current crisis is not exempt from this. The global digitalization of societies reinforces this sense of evolution, even revolution. Eric Schmidt, former head of Google and current president of the Defence Innovation Council in the USA, intends to initiate this change through digital, making New York State the forerunner in digital technology, but this change can be initiated at all levels and it is not necessary to be called Google, Amazon or Apple to be an actor in its own movement.

A necessary agility for companies

Today, companies must continue to promote and adopt this digitalisation even more rapidly. Yesterday it was the digitalization of customer service, today it is the digitalization of working methods, and tomorrow it will be the digitalization of behavioral management.

Like the previous crises listed above, we are personally convinced that tomorrow’s change will be digital and behavioural. This is why every company today must seize this opportunity to build the economic and entrepreneurial world of tomorrow and ensure its sustainability in an unstable context.

It is no longer just a question of meeting consumer expectations or safeguarding jobs by reducing production costs. We are convinced that today we must put a human relationship at the heart of our operations, one that brings value and respects new consumption and motivation patterns. This is why we place this digital approach at the heart of the design of our tools and the values of our company, always focusing our attention on the perception of this approach.

The break with the actors in today’s world of work is really in the management of motivations and behaviours. Companies that do not know how to be agile and adapt to new codes risk finding themselves sidelined.

Putting behavioural balance back at the centre of management

The issue is no longer “how to take advantage of digital tools for my clients” but “how to seize the opportunity of digital to engage my teams and develop the dynamics of my projects”.

This new issue is new in our society and taking into account the statutory elements, while not forgetting to encourage the autonomy of teams, must be accompanied by adequate means so as not to be misunderstood…

In order to avoid this negative perception of the use of digital tools in companies aimed at motivating and stimulating internal actors, it seems important to us today to be respectful of its resources and to succeed in developing a benevolent “pathos”. The idea is therefore not only to propose digital tools for motivation and commitment, but to adopt a natural transfer between intention — initiated by pedagogy and internal communication — and action — created by the behavioural balance.

It is by implementing a logic of nudge management that tooodooo promotes the creation of tomorrow’s management. By digitizing team leadership and motivation with a tool that is totally new in its design and ergonomics, we hope to become the new major player in incentive and managerial leadership for companies. The digitalisation of companies is certainly in constant evolution, (and as we have seen, very often forced and compulsory) but it is by associating it with a human and responsible management that they will be able to face the uncertainty of the markets and bring back a little serenity in an environment that sometimes seems out of control.