Title: 12 Cute Thanksgiving Baby PhotoShoot That You Can Take Yourself
URL: https://medium.com/@mamapearofficial/12-cute-thanksgiving-baby-photoshoot-that-you-can-take-yourself-58d4bc8067a6
Tags: Photoshoot, Baby Photography, Thanksgiving Pictures, Thanksgiving, Baby
----------------------------------------
Thanksgiving Baby Photoshoot

Thanksgiving is a great holiday. It is about the food, the family togetherness, and thankfulness, especially if you just have a new baby this year, it will be reason enough to be thankful a million times over.

Here, we have put up 12 baby photoshoot for Thanksgiving day. With these ideas, you’ll definitely have your whole family smiling so you can capture some beautiful memories this Thanksgiving.

Baby in a Pumpkin

Baby in a pumpkin photoshoot

You can’t go wrong with a baby in a pumpkin! If your little one is small enough, simply cut out a hole at the top and put them in. Don’t forget to scoop out the insides! If they’re a little bit holder, cut out two holes near the bottom for their legs to stick out. Don’t forget a cute little pumpkin hat on top!

2. DIY Harvest Baby

DIY Harvest Baby Photoshoot

A baby in a brown outfit along with a cute orange hairband is an easy photo that anyone can take! Just try to make sure no one is around and get a good angle. Place the baby in a saucepan to give a perfect DIY shoot with long placing some corns and vegetables around the baby.

3. Gobble Till You Wobble

Gobble Till You Wobble Baby Photoshoot

This Turkish Day style your baby in a chicken costume. Put your little one on a plane surface and design the setup for this adorable thanksgiving baby photo!

4. Little Chef

Little Chef Photoshoot

Fall in love with this photo so much because your newborn has now become a little chef. Just prepare a setup with a chef hat for your child and place some kitchen utensils around him. Get your perfect look!

5. Baby Pumpkin in Milk Basket

Baby Pumpkin in Milk Basket

Lay a black and white checkered blanket outside and fill a decorative metal bucket as a milk bath for your little one! Sprinkle a few plastic pumpkins and leaves from any craft store and top it off with a gorgeous orange bow or this orange headband if you have a little girl.

6. Roasted Chicken

Roasted Chicken Baby photoshoot

Capture some of the moments that make this year’s celebration unique, including the great shot of the beautifully-set table before everyone digs in, but remember to include your “Turkey” on the table.

7. Baby with fruits wardrobe

Baby with fruits wardrobe

A baby in a fruit wardrobe works for all seasons, but I love it in the fall because it has that rustic harvest feel. Combine it with a tan, burlap style blanket, baby with adorable headband, handmade dolls, and some plastic pumpkins of various shapes and sizes, and you have an easy photo op!

8. SUNFLOWER FUN

Sunflower Fun in the Farm

This adorable sunflower photo session doesn’t have to be done in a sunflower field! You can definitely imitate this look in your own yard. Choose a grassy area to place your baby in a metal bucket. You can use plastic sunflowers or real ones and place them all around in galvanized pitchers or vases. Use an adorable ivory lace outfit like this one or your little girl too.

9. Painted Baby Bum

Painted Baby Bum photoshoot

The painted baby bum! Too cute! Get some washable orange and green paint and hope your baby doesn’t scoot around too much. If you have a younger baby, place them on their belly for the photo.

10. Leave Fall

Leave Fall Baby photoshoot

If you have a ton of trees in your yard, wait until the leaves fall and grab the baby in a pile of leaves picture!

11. Indoor Fall Shoot

Indoor Fall Baby Shoot

Love this indoor fall photoshoot. Sit your baby in a wooden crate with some fall-colored pillows. You can use a wooden backdrop or just a clear area in your home with good lighting. Father all your fall decor around your homes like pumpkins and leaves and you’re set!

12. Pumpkin Halo Shoot

Pumpkin Halo Shoot

Give your baby a pumpkin halo with this cute photo. A bunch of mini pumpkins surrounding your little one is perfect for this one.