Title: Build a Custom Slack + Airtable Task Management Application
URL: https://medium.com/swlh/build-a-custom-slack-airtable-task-management-application-d95c8e7eb55c
Tags: Slack, Productivity, Technology, API, Project Management
----------------------------------------
Prepare your Airtable Base

Once you log in to Airtable, copy this base by clicking the link and select the workspace you’d like to add the base to:

https://airtable.com/addBaseFromShare/shrDjE80mXmDexLfM?utm_source=airtable_shared_application

Install Slack App Using Autocode

Now copy my Slack app template using this link:

https://autocode.stdlib.com/github/JanethL/TaskManagerBot/?filename=README.md

Sign in or create a free account. If you have a Standard Library account, click Already Registered and sign in using your Standard Library credentials.

Give your project a unique name and select Start API Project from Github:

Fork Code from Github

Autocode automatically sets up a project scaffold to save your project as an API endpoint.

To deploy your API to the cloud, navigate through the functions/events/scheduler folders on the left and select weekly.js file.

Enter weekly.js

Click Accounts Required

Select the red Account Required button, which will prompt you to link Slack and Airtable accounts.

Link Resources

Let’s start by linking a Slack Resource. Select Link New Resource to link a new Slack app.

Install Standard Library App

You should see an OAuth popup. Select the workspace you’d like to install your Slack app in, and click Allow.

Click Allow

Give your Slack app a name and image if you’d like.

Select Finish

Select Finish. Next select Link Resource to connect to your Airtable account by following the instructions on the modal to retrieve your Airtable API Key and select finish.

Link Airtable

Find and select your base and click Finish.

Pick an Airtable base

The green checkmarks confirm that you’ve linked your accounts properly. Select Finished Linking.

Select Finished Linking

You’re ready to deploy your Slack App! Select Deploy in the bottom-left of the file manager.

Deploy App

Continue

Your Slack App is now available for use in the Slack workspace you authorized it.

The final step is to populate the Members Airtable with active members in your workspace by running /cmd getmembers from any channel in Slack. You can then select the team members you’d like to have your app message.

🙌🏼 Your Slack task manager is all set!