Title: Traditional Banking Sucks
URL: https://medium.com/dot-dots/traditional-banking-sucks-2fb57828231b
Tags: Web3, Economics, Cryptocurrency, Money, Banking
----------------------------------------
The Lack of Organized Decision-Making

Slow decision-making is a huge challenge for traditional banks. Since these corporations rely on a hierarchical structure in most cases and involve many stakeholders, it might take weeks or even months for a single decision to be made.

For instance, if you want to take credit in a bank, you’ll be forced to fill out a massive pile of documents and wait until some manager in headquarters will review your case and make a decision. With decentralized systems, everything goes faster as it does not rely on a single person or group in making decisions.

Government Bailouts

A bailout can be defined as an injection of money typically from the government to a company facing the threat of bankruptcy or collapse.

(2009 anyone?) Bailouts might come in different forms depending on the situation, but, in most cases, they place a set of requirements on the financial body in terms of restructuring, change management, dividend payment, etc.

While the government considers bailout a saving practice, they rarely resolve the root problem and result in increased debt. Moreover, the financial body might be unable to fulfill its commitment, which will only lead to bankruptcy in the long run.

Let’s talk numbers: the total direct cost of crisis-related bailouts was calculated at $498 billion, which can be compared to 3.5% of the gross domestic product.

Corruption

This is the most obvious yet less looked at. Corruption is the phenomenon responsible for destroying economies and livelihoods. It helps keep poor countries poor and promotes inequity at all levels.

Unfortunately, corruption is the case in the banking sector. The degree might vary from the region and economy, but it is still there, penetrating the industries.

Increased bribery rate affects both internal and external processes, leading to restricted access to loans and bringing negative implications to the economy.