Title: A Tale of Two Christmases
URL: https://medium.com/@libbyclement/a-tale-of-two-christmases-734e28a996e6
Tags: Loneliness, Grief, Christmas
----------------------------------------
For some of us Christmas will always be different…

Photo credit: DAVIDSONLUNA on Unsplash

Today, as I walked through the graveyard in my hometown, I thought about how there are two types of Christmases that have always coexisted side by side, pandemic or no pandemic.

As I watched people tend to the graves of their loved ones I thought of my own loss. It is barely over a year since my mum died and in the intervening months since last Christmas and this, I have become attuned to the fact that there are in fact two universes; the universe in which all is in place and the one which is defined by the person, or people, who are missing.

For those of us occupying the latter universe, Christmas exists in duality. There is the joy of seeing out another year with those whom we love and have shared so much, there is the hope for brighter and better things to come in the New Year, but there is also absence. Inside the other universe, within the ‘other Christmas’, the very happening of Christmas itself brings back memories of times that can’t be recreated and people who we can’t bring back. Yet Christmas persists. So we divide ourselves, becoming part one world and part another; half grief and half merriment.

This Christmas is particularly curious in that there is an acknowledgement that Christmas is sometimes, and for some people, less about celebration than survival. It’s about saying I made it, I survived, I clung on through the darkness and here I am.

When we think back to the origins of Christmas, both as the celebration of the birth of Jesus the saviour, and further back in history, to the pagan tradition of a festival of light in the midwinter, Christmas has always had an element of endurance. In the middle of this unrelenting pandemic we feel this more than ever; the two Christmases coalesce. This year we are all grieving for a year that we haven’t had, a year in which death has permeated the collective consciousness, where even the most sociable among us have felt what it is to be lonely. Perhaps for the first time some people can truly appreciate what it is to spend Christmas alone and to feel the pain of separation from those who they love.

I hope that this Christmas makes us kinder and spreads, alongside joy and hope, understanding. For whatever you are missing out on this Christmas, do remember that for some of us there are always two Christmases.