Title: Beginner’s Guide to Marketing B2B
URL: https://medium.com/@ioogoinc/beginners-guide-to-marketing-b2b-f24ebc56f67d
Tags: Marketing B2b, Marketing Strategies, Audience Engagement, Target Audience, Ioogo Business
----------------------------------------
One of the biggest challenges for most freshly founded businesses is how to reach their target audience. Who is your target audience anyway? What are the right channels and tools? The vast range of digital marketing tools makes it necessary to have a well-prepared strategy to use the available budget wisely and effectively. In this article, we will show you how to get started.

Laying the foundations of a marketing strategy

The right marketing strategy can be developed if you have the right information about your market. If you know to whom to provide your services or sell your products, you can determine how to reach them. So the first step is to get a picture of your ideal customer or customers.

The buyer persona is one of the ideal customers you want to reach with your messages through digital or traditional channels. It’s important to understand the current challenges of the Buyer Persona and how you can address them. By understanding how to create value for potential customers, you are one step ahead in developing your marketing strategy.

How to reach the buyer persona

In the B2B market, your customers are companies of all sizes. Try to engage with your target audience, because one of the foundations of a credible and effective marketing plan is to base your hypotheses on facts and test them. Your solutions may even change as a result of these discussions because it is in your best interest to bring to market a product or service that is in demand.

Once you know what to sell and to whom, the next step is to plan the channels through which you will reach your customers. A beautiful website is no longer enough to get your business off the ground — you need to draw attention to it.

In the B2B market, positioning yourself as an expert is a common and now unavoidable strategy. There are several digital tools (for example, Google Trends) that you can use to find out which topics are currently of interest to your target audience. By sharing useful content on these topics and being active on social media platforms and in various professional groups, you can quickly draw attention to your company.

The most common channels to reach your Buyer Persona:

● Email marketing: While mass emailing is not the most effective form of marketing, today’s marketing automation can help you create more personalized messages and email series.

● Digital content production: Your website, your company blog, your social media platforms, and all your online presence together make up your digital content, which you can continuously update and tailor to the needs of your Buyer Persona.

● SEO: With your online content, it is especially important that your texts contain the keywords that your potential customers are actually searching for.

● Online advertising: You can easily reach your target audience with either Google Ads or Facebook ads, and effectively increase your sales with a single well-optimized and tested ad.

If you want to learn more about B2B marketing strategies, if you want to know how to start your business’s marketing activities, what to spend on and what to avoid, if you want to know who your customers are and how to reach them, join Ioogo’s Principles of Marketing webinar.