Title: TV review: Agents of SHIELD — ‘Shadows’
URL: https://simonc.me.uk/tv-review-agents-of-shield-shadows-8c39f52a629e
Tags: Movies, TV, Marvel, Review
----------------------------------------
The string of entertaining and surprising episodes that Agents of SHIELD began to pull together at the close of its ropey first season continues with ‘Shadows’, a solid premiere that throws us back into the uncertain world of the agents with an added edge of hopelessness and desperation as they lay everything on the line to gain something that barely gives them an advantage in the war against Hydra.



To make matters worse, they even lose the important MacGuffin in the process of securing themselves a quinjet that is capable of being cloaked. The real kicker is seeing that Fitz has been trying to work on such technology and has made no headway, as he talks to a hallucination of Simmons while struggling to recall the scientific knowledge he had before Ward tried to kill the two of them last season.



As far as the others go, we can see that Skye and May now have a really effective working partnership in the field and that Coulson has become somewhat reclusive. Ward’s locked up (in a cell that bizarrely seems to have no bars) and has apparently gone through a couple of suicidal experiences. Chances are, no matter what he says, he can’t be trusted. Although, without Garrett to command him, what kind of man is Ward meant to be anymore?

There are a whole host of new characters too, and none of them have a particularly great time working alongside the SHIELD agents, ending up in a car crash after Lucy Lawless’s Isabelle Hartley has been forced to have her hand sliced off (courtesy of said mysterious MacGuffin, which is introduced in an early sequence that’ll get people excited for the upcoming Agent Carter series starring Hayley Atwell) and Nick Blood’s Lance Hunter has likely sustained some serious injuries of his own.



The best addition is on the villainous side of things, though, as new character Carl Creel (Brian Patrick Wade) provides the first truly menacing superpowered foe for our heroes. This character, also known as the Absorbing Man, is straight from the comics and he has the ability to take on the properties of whatever material he comes into contact with. It’s going to make him difficult to defeat and I’m looking forward to seeing what the show decides to do with him next.



All in all, this is a really decent return for SHIELD that should reassure fans that the improvements it made at the end of Season 1 were more than just momentum built off the great twist in Captain America 2. There’s a lot to be excited about here, some of the execution is still clumsy, but it has a very watchable quality and I’m hopeful about the signs of where this is going.

Agents of SHIELD airs on Channel 4, on Fridays at 8pm